I believe it is, and getting ready to chat with Jimmy Bond as we look out on a very unusually warm December day.
We're sitting in his office at 4444 Carter Creek Parkway.
Jimmy, now test your machine.
Hi, Haskell.
It's good to have you here.
Good to see you again and look forward to our visit.
Jimmy, as we begin, let's make believe that a person looking at this material or listening to it is not acquainted with you and your background.
Begin, if you would, with a brief biographical summary of your growing up and experience until you become an employee of A&M.
It turns out that I was born and had my upbringing in College Station.
Born in 1936, College Station was incorporated in 1938 so I grew up in the village of College Station with A&M as my playground along with my friends.
Lived out
south of College Station at what was then a community known as Rock Prairie.
Now a very strategic crossing of the county is Rock Prairie Road and that intersects where I grew up.
Went to public school as a third generation Brazos Countyite.
through public school at A&M Consolidated School System and stayed to attend A&M as did almost all of my classmates, at which time A&M was an all-male, all military
institution and we in those days wore a uniform 24 hours a day in church, dates, whatever.
Even as a local there was no such thing as being non-reg and being legal.
So that was my upbringing.
I took a commission and served
in the Army, Quartermaster Corps at Fort Lee, Virginia for a brief period then completed my reserve commitment in business in Navasota for 18 years.
with family owned business there until 1976 when I was summoned and given the opportunity to replace the then one and first system attorney that A&M had had as its in-house lawyer.
and did that in March of 1976 bringing with me my wife who was also a native of College Station and my family of four children.
Now you went to law school where?
I went to law school during my period of employment at Navasota which was insurance and real estate and in the evenings I commuted to the University of Houston
by leaving at four o'clock, three days a week, getting back home.
I'd attend class from six to nine, and we'd get home about 10.30 or quarter to 11.
And did that four and a half years, and did that in the first 10 years out of A&M.
Took that long, but obtained my law degree and practiced law the last eight years before leaving Navasota.
and before assuming the position at A&M.
All right, before we go on with your career, summarize as best you can your predecessor, whom most of us referred to as Judge Amos.
Describe him and his manner and style, and as far as you know, the general nature of his task as the chief counsel for A&M.
First of all, he was universally loved.
as far as I could tell by everybody, and rightfully so.
Secondly, he came to A&M out of the Attorney General's office as sort of a program of loaning him to A&M, and I don't know whether General Rutter or who had managed to pull that off, but he then became a fully vested employee of the system, which was then administered, as you know, by basically one person throughout most of that time.
But J.A.
Jake Amos, lovingly called Judge Amos, was the single lawyer, and I guess out of necessity operated in a manner that all of us wish we could have continued, and that would be that he would frequently answer a question by asking you one, and if he did not get the matter solved by just dealing that way with his clients,
almost without exception, his opinions would be found in the margin of the letter that came over.
And so what I had to look at was basically an exchange of some level of correspondence, but there was not any body of opinions very much to go by.
He did so and in those days was able to manage the job that way.
about whether or not I would be sufficiently challenged.
And I came to the position, wanting to focus and be very much focused on a particular area of law.
And that was emerging and that was education law.
Worrying as I did, though, that the thing looked pretty sleepy when I interviewed and well, was that going to keep me challenged?
So that was kind of the nature of
the program when I arrived.
When you moved in, describe the location of the legal office and the staffing and so forth.
Judge Amos and then me were placed within the office of the Vice Chancellor and Comptroller, Clyde Freeman, who we all loved and
learn to revere based on his wonderful achievements, but we were all within his his administration which was located on the north end of the second floor across the rotunda, the open rotunda from the Chancellor's lodging on the south end of the second floor.
And you said 1976 is when you began?
That's correct, March of 76.
And so you got there just about the same time Dr. Williams became ill.
I was there just before his terrible heart attack.
Back to the selection process.
Matter of months.
The selection process in which you were selected.
Did somebody contact you?
There wasn't a search committee?
There wasn't that?
I had a father-in-law who was on the first floor who reported to Clyde.
Okay.
And he was a fiscal officer.
And he became aware that Judge Amos was going to retire.
He casually asked me if I would possibly have any interest in that kind of job.
I expressed, you know, more than a casual interest.
And I had been in a
I had been in a meeting down at Cat Arena that's owned by Dolph Briscoe.
And I had been president of the Chamber of Commerce and we had had Dolph as our speaker and in my home.
And when I attended that meeting down there as he prepared to run for governor, Mr. Freeman was there.
And it just happened that he and I had spent a lot of time chatting.
Neither one of us were big bird hunters.
And we had some enjoyable visits.
And so I was a known quantity to Clyde by reason of that visit.
And so it's just how the stars sort of came together.
It would be, I would say, fortuitous and little else.
as far as you understood at the time you were selected what were was the major area of responsibility and duty of the office what did you think the job was going to be i thought it would be in the nature of the corporate council that is there to to advise and help administrative decisions that you would typically
see as an in-house counsel.
I was told that their level of interest was in the emerging area of employment law and that they would give me the authority to engage a second lawyer very soon after Judge Amos retired and that they wanted that person to have some expertise in employment law.
As you recall,
was so lucky to hire Ed Koska as my second in command and he had a master's degree in employment law at Michigan State from that law school.
Alright, you came in, what were your impressions of Jack Williams?
Gosh, I loved the man then and now and I guess that's a thing that grows.
I'm certain that he was not everything that my fond recollections dictate now, but I adored him.
He was a man of very few but convincing words.
And when he completed whatever he had to say and coupled it with the smile and style that you got out of it,
Dr. Williams.
You just knew you were in tall company and I had that enormous amount of respect for him.
And then he had the terrible year-long outage that almost took his life.
And Mr. Freeman, as you know, was the person then to step in and run the system.
and in that time, president of the university.
I mean, that was a single job.
So that was just one man short, and the number of people running that total organization were pretty small then.
I was still new and looking for validation, and I can so well remember not knowing for sure what Dr. Williams' condition was.
He had gotten back to the president's home
And I came to learn that he was reading most of the material.
They would take him a reading file and he was sitting in his chair and read.
And he was a wonderful dictator.
And I would get these little one sentence centered in the middle of a small monarch-sized piece of paper that would make you feel like a million dollars.
It's almost a thing that would make you weep now when you think back of how
a man could use so few words and have such a validating effect on people and get the very best out of them.
That's what I would describe him as being.
As one who was working across the street then for Dr. Calhoun, I remember also that Williams, before being ill but even after he recovered,
that there was a quick turnaround on almost every piece of mail.
It didn't lie on the table very long.
It certainly did not.
He was decisive, if not always right, but he was certainly decisive.
All right, back to the beginning.
As you began your task,
Did you find any landmines or any leftovers?
Were there any critical cases that you had to join in and work on immediately?
There were two or three, and I had the good fortune of having spent the time to go through the files.
And just my curiosity drove me to want to know what they all amounted to.
I was a little surprised that there were as few as there were, but some were...
you know, substantial.
And I can remember the Preston pool case was in a stage of a consent decree with the Justice Department.
And that had been a black extension agent out of Galveston.
And as I understand it, as we sit here today, and this is January of 2000, I think there is still the vestiges are, I think the Preston pool case is still
in the stratosphere, never having been completely dismissed by the Justice Department learned that not so long ago.
That was one case.
And, you know, I learned for the first time, some of the some of the words and uses of terms that is used in statistical sampling of numbers and
And I remember how really I felt like I was going to school, almost a seminar on how the Justice Department and people dealing with numbers and statistics make those things say what they want to say.
The other thing was that there was a longstanding lawsuit
at Prairie View involving 100 plus acres of land next to the Prairie View campus that had been occupied for over 100 years by a family named Sorsby.
And the Sorsby family had been using that property
a lawsuit had been filed like you would to, to oust a trespasser.
And that suit had been laying around a long time and that legislation had been passed and, and I went to the first board meeting that was introduced to the board for the first time.
And I so well remember Dooley Bells in his
kind of hard-hitting style, wouldn't know what I knew about that Sarsby lawsuit.
Well, again, good fortune served me, and I had read it enough to be able to speak to it.
And I probably knew more about it than my predecessor because it was old and stale.
But those things serve you pretty well over the long haul when you're working in a fora board or a bureaucracy.
Those are two things I remember very well.
I also remember going through those files that I noticed a file for Cullen Davis at Fort Worth who had been a former student.
I'm not sure if Cullen was a graduate but he clearly was an Aggie and Cullen had made substantial gifts of shares of stock to the university and
And so that's just another one of the files that I remember seeing when I first arrived.
Describe how you became acquainted with the way boards of regents really operate.
There must have been some interesting learning experiences in those first months.
There were, and it was a little bit difficult for me at this stage to go back and
and put things exactly where they belong.
But what happened soon after that event that I just told you about, and I later learned how important that was, because today, Mr. Bell is on a board that I serve, which is the Heat Foundation Board.
And I don't have a better friend or a more trusted confidant anywhere than Dooley Bell.
And it all kind of comes out of first impressions.
Well, another was when Royce Wisemaker was appointed to the board.
I may use a word here that is characteristic of Royce, and I love him very much.
But the meeting went along throughout his being sworn in
that day by Peyton McKnight or Bill Moore or whoever came to make it a pretty pompous ceremony.
And I acted as counsel throughout the course of the meeting and responded in an appropriate way and kept my place and did what I thought was right.
When the meeting was over, I made it my way over to his side of the room
to simply, before leaving, make sure that I had greeted him and introduced myself to him.
And happily did not say the wrong words, just introduced myself by name, and he called me lawyer, and forever did, and said he had been watching me.
that he knew a lot about lawyers and how they operated, and so far he had been favorably impressed.
And then he wheeled around in his chair and looked up over his glasses and told me that he was damn glad that I didn't come over there and say, welcome aboard.
He said, every other son of a bitch in the room.
And he said, I want you to know I've been aboard for a very long time.
He was the first donor to the President's Endowed Scholarship.
And he was the first of a lot of things, as you know.
And Royce had been a player, quote unquote, at our great university for a very long time and considered himself to have paid his dues.
And he'd been on the first Aggie club.
So Royce had been offended, frankly, by those who
had just casually used an expression that we all use, welcome aboard.
Well, he took that from me, hey buddy, I've been aboard a long time before you've ever even thought of.
And so it's those kinds of experiences.
John Blocker came on the board at some later date, and it was not long after I got there, because Joe Reynolds was on the board,
And before leaving Navasota, I had done a very complex real estate deal for my bank president that had sold land in Robinson County to Joe Reynolds and Calvin Guest, who bought things together and were marine solid friends and still are to this day and well should be.
but they had been part of a takeout group of some land that my bank president and some others had bought and in those days there were wraparound mortgages there were second liens and all the profits were represented in second mortgages and these wraparound notes and lord have mercy i had i had developed a whole schedule so anybody could understand i remember had shared that with calvin
who had given it to Joe.
And so I was a known quantity to Joe.
And Joe and Blocker met me over in the MSC one day just by chance.
And they made it very clear to me that I had a great future at A&M and that I was their kind of person.
Now, Joe was pretty good about blowing that smoke.
You know, Joe has...
a jillion and one best friends.
I was one of them and I honored that.
But it so happened that I was at the first cocktail party reception after the board meeting in which John Blocker had been sworn in and sat as a regent for the first time.
Well, guess what?
When I was in Navasota a few months earlier, maybe six months or a year,
I had represented John's wife in a divorce.
They had moved up to Mavisota when he was president of Dresser and had bought one of those wonderful, huge homes in Mavisota out by what is now the bypass, the old Moore home place.
And Peggy was a very active part of the community.
I was a very active part of the community.
My law partner and I represented
Peggy in the divorce.
Happily, it had been a fairly calm and a divorce where John had been, in my opinion, a stand-up good guy, generous.
Whenever lawyers begin to think that, they're usually in trouble because somebody's usually fooling them.
But I didn't think so.
Just another tribute to John.
Many years later, or several years later,
I was invited to a wedding of one of his boys down at St. John's Episcopal Church in River Oaks.
My wife and I attended that.
And we then went to the reception at River Oaks and a marvelous event.
And his son and little wife were having their first dance.
And John came around and sat by me and he said, Jimmy said, well, Peggy was there.
the mother of these children were there.
And John's new wife elected not to come.
I thought it was a class act thing to do.
Allowed the parents, you know, to not be bothered by third party new wife.
And John came over and sat by me and he said, Jimmy, I want you to know something.
That, you know, I've made a lot of money since the time that our divorce occurred.
And he indeed had.
He had made a lot of money
in the drilling business and it generated that blocker drilling and gone on from dresser to become really wealthy he said i want you to know that i created a trust for pain because i just felt like by god i already do that she's the mother of my children and i had the good fortune of making
most of my money after we married.
And I just wanted to share that with you.
Well, you know those stories last a long time.
Tells you what people are made out of.
Many people could give those kind of stories about John Blocker, but that's one of them.
Alright, now you've been giving positive.
Can you think of any interesting where you as a beginner stumbled, stumped your toe or something?
I had the Zincraft case completely worked out with the Justice Department.
And to work out what I thought we had to do, I had the players in my puzzle were Jarvis Miller, who was a stiff-necked, hard-headed guy that didn't like to give an inch.
And he wasn't keen on giving on this Justice Department beating us up over women in the Corps, women in the band, women in Rudders and Rangers, and so forth.
But I had, with the help of John Coles and with the help of General Simpson and some others, Colonel Haney, we've gone through depositions and we've come to the realization that this matter needed to be resolved.
And so I got from the Justice Department what it is that I thought was the bottom line, entry level,
what maybe could help us get into a consent decree.
From that, I developed a working paper of all these issues, and I tried to personalize them to ourselves so that if I got a working group together, that we could go through my set of issues that I had personalized
So that everybody would understand them, where we live.
And I had lawyers from the Attorney General's office.
I mean, I had John Fainer, who was first Assistant Attorney General.
I had Lonnie Zwiener, who was the expert on civil rights litigation, and his assistant.
And I had Frank Denius, who was a volunteer, and his associate.
I had five lawyers besides my two or three that were working on the case.
We invited Regents to come and I got Jarvis, President Miller, to basically agree to those critical issues about how to make this work.
Jarvis was okay.
I got this group in.
We spent all day long.
Chairman Wells presided.
I went through that thing from one end to the other.
We answered every question, what we could live with, what we couldn't live with, what I need to modify in order to live with it.
And we were in wonderful shape to resolve that lawsuit.
So we have a board meeting that comes up.
And we get to that point where I'm to make my presentation about what we have
agreed on as a working group and joe bless his heart who was still head of a very powerful law firm in houston which was reynolds white allen cook joe had been a school lawyer you know with a h.i with the hisd and he was a known force and not to be argued with or for meetup
try to outdo, I will say to you that I feel like, then and now, that I knew more about the current state of the law than he did about the issues and what that case really was about.
But Joe took the personal privilege to rise to announce to the board that
that case was winnable and that we were, and he took me on, one on one.
I don't know who in the name of heaven gave me the authority to even be talking to the Justice Department on any basis associated with settling.
We were not going to settle anything, now or ever.
And it was in that same meeting that the board passed a resolution
against doing it and after that I was placed in a another direction where Joe placed John Tyler of his firm in our group to well what happened was they came up with a bunch of haircut cases and some of the dress code cases
that the feds had gotten tired of and the federal courts had begun to say you know we're tired of things and y'all resolve them and it was almost trying to trying to place our case in the same stance with the federal courts and it just wouldn't work but i took a took a heck of a beating that day and
There were a lot of regents who had been at my workshop who knew that I didn't deserve what I got.
But what I learned was that if you're going to represent a board, they're the board and you're not.
And wherever they elect to go, you've got to be a policeman with respect to saying what you think the law is.
But at some point,
they do what they want to do so long as you've given them your best shot, that's all you can do.
Then you represent a client.
Now I hadn't thought about this case.
Let's go back.
I think this is an important topic.
This case involves a young co-ed.
I believe her father and stepfather both were bird colonels in the Air Force.
She had come out of San Antonio out of a retired military background.
And I think her mother was wheelchair bound and had reared this young lady not to back up to anything.
And she came when co-education was beginning to be campus wide in every way.
By that I mean we had had a number of years when
women were here in limited numbers so would you kind of review the that that whole case our issue to be honest with you when we took depositions it really needs to be told somewhere the question